[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Is there a harmony to all
that happens in our universe?
Could we be part of
a cosmic symphony?
In this episode, we discover
why the laws of physics
are potentially the same
as the laws of harmony,
and how the strings of
the cosmic orchestra
are plucked to
create our universe.
Let's dive into our
multi-dimensionality,
string theory, and
some mystery school
teachings on how to
harness vibration.
The great Albert
Einstein, who always
wanted to know the
thoughts of God,
was convinced that
quantum mechanics was not
the final answer or real thing.
He said, "Quantum
mechanics says a lot,
but it does not
bring us any closer
to the secrets of the old one."
Einstein spent the last 30
years of his life searching
for a theory of everything,
a single theory that unifies
all the forces into one.
It would be a formulation
that describes the universe
before all the shatterings
and symmetry breakings that
occurred in the first
seconds of the Big Bang.
Finding such a
theory would not only
explain some of the
mysteries of our universe,
it would give us insight into
the nature of the multiverse.
While Einstein was not
successful at accomplishing
this in his lifetime,
his legacy has lived on
to inspire many generations.
Today, physicists
are still searching
for this theory of everything.
Many ideas have been proposed.
None have yet been verified
beyond the standard model.
But there is a leading
candidate called
M-theory that unified several
string theories together
into a sophisticated
and elegant framework.
What's unique about this model?
For starters, it goes
deeper than quarks
and says that the truly
fundamental components
of a reality are
harmonically vibrating,
supersymmetric
strings and membranes.
What's meant by strings
and membranes here?
A common analogy is to
imagine a guitar string
or the membrane of a drum.
When we pluck the string
or strike the drum,
we cause it to vibrate at
certain frequency or note,
producing a sound.
Recall from other episodes
that cymatics has shown us
how the vibrational energy of
sound can also shape matter.
In a similar way, string
theory and M-theory
say there are vibrating
filaments of energy that
are the cause of all
particles, forces,
and even the dark matter in our
universe and the dark energy.
These different
particles and forces
are thought of as different
notes or frequencies
of vibration playing on the
quantum string or membrane.
This idea ties in
with the concept
that everything is energy,
as well as the Hermetic
Principle of Vibration that
says everything vibrates.
This principle explains
that the differences
between different manifestations
of matter, energy, mind,
and even spirit result
largely from varying
rates of vibration.
So what is this
energy of vibration?
What is its essence?
Well, M-theory says it's
the strings and membranes.
But what actually is vibrating?
What are these things made of?
String theory has proposed that
it's the fabric of space itself
that is folded or curled up
in a certain geometric pattern
at every point.
Why don't we see this
folding up of space though?
Well, there's two reasons given.
First, it's happening through
seven extra dimensions
beyond our usual perception
of three dimensional space.
And second, these
extra dimensions
are only found at the
smallest microcosmic scale,
smaller than quarks
and electrons
at 10 to the minus 32
centimeters across,
which is very tiny.
These quanta of space
are far too small
for even our most powerful
detectors and particle
accelerators to access directly.
Even though these extra
dimensions are hidden,
they still have an impact
on things we can observe.
This is because the shape
of the extra dimensions
constrains how the
strings can vibrate.
Just to recap, what
we're exploring here
is the possibility
that space time
is curled up into some
multi-dimensional geometry.
As this vibrates at
different frequencies,
it produces all the
energy, particles, forces,
and various other parameters
that make up our universe
and make it what it is.
These different
particles and forces
are then responsible for all
the splendor and diversity
we see in the world around us.
Now on that note, recall
from other episodes
that our universe
just so happens
to be finely tuned for life and
consciousness to evolve in it.
There are over 20 fundamental
constants in our universe
that are all necessary for
the development of life.
Change any one of those values,
and the universe we know
would not exist.
How is it that our universe
is so finely tuned?
Well string theory
has proposed that what
determines this fine tuning and
all the unique characteristics
it brings to our universe
is the particular geometry
of the extra higher
dimensions that
govern the formation of
these strings and membranes.
Here again, we see physicists
talking about things
that metaphysicists
have said for ages,
namely that our universe is
built upon sacred geometry.
Although in this
case, the geometry
is only found at
the quantum scale,
in 11-dimensional hyperspace.
Why is that?
Mathematics of
string theory only
works in a universe of
10 dimensions of space
and 1 dimension of time, giving
a total of 11 dimensions.
This breaks down into some
significant numerology
of 1, 3, 7, and 11.
1 dimension of time plus 3
dimensions of regular space
and 7 extra dimensions
of hyperspace
that curls up on
itself, bringing us
to a total of 11 dimensions.
Now, numerologists like
to add numbers together.
So when we add 1
plus 3 plus 7 plus 11
we get 22, which
also reduces to 4.
And what's interesting
about these numbers
is that they are all
highly significant
in a cabalistic framework.
The 1 represents the spark that
initiates creation and sits
at the apex of the tree.
3 represents the top triad
of the realm of spirit.
7 represents all the rest
of the tree below the abyss,
as well as the number
of vertical levels
there are on the tree.
11 is the hidden numerology
that the tree reveals to us,
represented by the
hidden sefirah called
da'at, which means knowledge.
22 is then equal to the
number of connecting pathways
on the tree, which
also correspond
to the number of letters
in the Hebrew alphabet.
And 4 shows up in
many ways on the tree,
but most prominently,
we talk about the four
worlds of creation.
I find it fascinating that the
mathematics of string theory
reveals the same significant
numbers as Kabbalah.
Most of us are
accustomed to thinking
of space time as continuous.
But to find a unified
theory, we need a way
to account for quantum gravity.
According to Einstein's
general relativity,
gravity is the
bending of space time.
This indicates that
one possibility
for getting a quantum gravity is
to quantize space time itself.
Now, what does that mean?
Recall that when
something is quantized,
it means it is discrete
instead of continuous.
It has gaps.
And within that gap
is the quantum vacuum.
So rather than
thinking of spacetime
as a continuous
sheet, think of it
more as a finely
woven fractal grid.
And as we go down to
the quantum scale,
we can imagine that there are
gaps between the junctions
of the grid.
And at the junctions
are the points
where space is curled up into
multi-dimensional geometric
shapes that vibrate.
These quanta of space have a
complex interwoven geometry.
What geometry is it?
That's the big question that
scientists don't know yet.
But one example often given is
called the Calabi-Yau manifold
shown here.
We can imagine
that all around us
is this grid of quantum
geometric shapes,
and we can move through them.
These extra dimensions are right
in front of us and around us
all the time, but we
aren't aware of them
because they don't register
with our five physical senses
and perceptions.
How often are we moving
through energies and dimensions
that we aren't even aware of?
Honestly, whether
we're looking at it
from a scientific
perspective, psychological,
or spiritual perspective,
it's all the time.
This is a good reminder
for us that just
because we don't see
or feel something,
doesn't mean it's not there.
Can we become more
aware of these things?
Yes, we can.
It requires training our mind
to access higher consciousness,
as well as the proper knowledge
of how to shift our vibration.
This brings us back to
the Hermetic Principle
of Vibration, and how the
mystery schools trained
initiates to master and apply
this principle at physical,
mental, and spiritual levels.
In music, different
instruments are
capable of making
different types of sound
and at different
frequency ranges.
The vibrations capable
of being produced
depend on the shape
of the instrument.
For example, an electric
guitar makes different sounds
than a bass guitar or violin.
Then, for any
particular instrument,
the person playing it
can also interact with it
to create different sounds,
harmonies, and music.
Each instrument
has its limitations
depending on the allowed
vibrations or notes
it is designed to play.
In a similar way, we can imagine
these geometrically enfolded
bits of multi-dimensional
space are
a type of instrument, which
type depends on the underlying
geometry.
String theorists say
that our universe
would have just one
type of geometry
at every point in space.
So only one kind
of instrument plays
the symphony of our universe.
But that instrument
or geometry can
play a variety of
vibrations and notes,
each one producing a
different particle,
force, energy, or
fundamental constant
that governs our universe.
Each point in space could
be playing a different note.
So we can imagine
a cosmic orchestra
all using the same instrument,
yet this instrument
is quite diverse and
beautiful in the vibrations
it is capable of producing.
So in this case,
the orchestra is not
really limited by having
only one type of instrument,
plus the instruments are
finely tuned in our universe
to create life
and consciousness.
Now, who are the players
of these instruments?
Quantum physics has verified
that physical particles
or waves only exist
upon observation.
When we observe things,
it changes things
depending on how we
choose to observe
or the assumptions we make.
Once we have made
an observation,
that thing we observe then
becomes entangled with us.
So it continues to exist
because we observed it,
because we have knowledge
or information about it
in our memory.
The physical
particles themselves,
while they are sentient, meaning
they can sense and interact
with things in
their environment,
they are not self thinking.
They are not equipped with
their own mind and will.
Another way of putting that
is that they cannot observe
themselves into being.
Could it be then that we,
as conscious observers, who
have mind, will, and volition
are the ones who determine
and also change
physical reality?
If so, does that mean
that we are the players
of these instruments?
Ancient mystery teachings
say, yes, our thoughts
create our reality.
Our thoughts are
directed by mind,
and mind is directed by will.
But the question is, which will?
Is it the ego's will
coming from selfishness,
or is it the collective will, as
in being swayed by programming
or herd mentality?
Is it the will of
nature and the universe,
meaning we are aligned with
the universal laws and flow
of nature, but also
then bound by them?
Or is it the will of
our eternal divine self,
spirit's will, God's will, which
is infinite and has no limits.
Becoming aligned and in the flow
with that highest divine will
is what we must
become attuned to.
So consider it like
the master tuner
that each player
in the orchestra
needs to tune
their instrument to
in order to be in
harmony with the whole.
If we are players in
a cosmic symphony,
wouldn't it be nice if we could
become well-trained musicians
who know how to tune, and then
use these instruments properly?
As of now, most
people don't know
how to use their instruments
well or even at all.
So the symphony
we are producing,
at least here on Earth,
is chaotic and dissonant.
And since we are connected
with the entire universe,
our chaos is sending
ripples across the cosmos.
The things we think, do, and say
send ripples through the Milky
Way and beyond.
So again, how can we become
more masterful at playing
the strings of creation?
Obviously, we don't
become virtuosos
by doing nothing to
improve our abilities.
Ask any maestro and they
will all say the same thing.
We only master the art
through proper training, lots
of daily practice,
and then having
bigger and bigger opportunities
to perform at the best.
This is exactly what the ancient
mystery schools were all about.
Let's return to the Hermetic
Principle of Vibration.
Hermeticists have been
revealing these phenomenon
long before modern
science and string
theories were been around.
For thousands of
years, initiates
to the hermetic
lineage have taught
that everything is of one
essence just manifesting
at different degrees
or modes of vibration.
And by everything,
it means all of it,
from the densest of matter
to things like sound, light,
the forces of nature, down to
the subatomic particles which
are vibrating at
very high rates,
and then moving even beyond
that into mind and all
its varying expressions
through our thoughts,
emotions, and desires,
and all the way up
to the highest realms
of pure spirit.
It is all the same
essence, just vibrating
at different frequencies.
If this is true, could
we adjust the frequency,
like turning the
dial on the radio
to transform and transmute
from one mode or manifestation
of that essence into another?
Yes, and this is the
core of true alchemy.
It is the art and
science of transformation
and transmutation
through the process
of extracting the essence and
then shifting its vibration,
primarily with the aim
of raising vibration.
Even string theorists
today are saying
that if we were to pluck one of
these vibrating superstrings,
it would change mode
and transform from
say a quark to a neutrino.
Pluck it again in a different
way and it becomes an electron.
That would be true
transformation.
String theory aside, we already
know from particle physics
that, with enough
energy, we can get
quarks to pop out of
the quantum vacuum
and generate new
types of matter.
And modern atomic
physicists have
proven that we can indeed
turn lead into gold
using particle accelerators.
It's just not cost effective
the way that scientists
are doing it today.
Interestingly, the
Hermetic initiates
also say there is an
ethereal substance that
is the connecting link between
the forms of vibratory energy,
known as matter on the one
hand, and energy or force
on the other.
They describe this ethereal
substance as of extreme tenuity
and elasticity, and it
pervades universal space,
serving as a medium
of transmission
of waves of vibratory energy.
As a side note, Nikola Tesla
used very similar wording
in his essay on Man's
Greatest Achievement.
He said, "Long
ago, man recognized
that all perceptible
matter comes
from a primary substance of a
tenuity beyond all conception
and filling all space."
Makes one wonder
if Tesla might have
been one of the three
initiates who authored
the "Kybalion" in 1912.
At any rate, they are clearly
talking about the ether
here, which we now know is
not so much a physical medium,
but rather the quantum
vacuum or zero point field.
This vibrational
level of the ether
matches up with the level for
these hyperdimensional strings.
But the Hermeticists go further
with the vibrational spectrum
than do physicists.
They push higher into the
realms of mind and spirit.
What is all this saying?
How can we use this?
Well first, it is
important to realize
that the connecting point is
the ether or the quantum vacuum.
Mind and spirit are above
that vibrational level,
while matter is below.
This puts superstrings or
etheric energy in the middle.
This is the transition
point or mediator
between what we typically call
physical and non-physical.
But it is really all
the same essence, just
different vibratory rates with
the so-called non-physical
levels vibrating
at such high rates
that most of our detectors are
not able to directly measure
them yet.
That's all.
Metaphysically, however, we can
interact with these energies.
How do we influence
etheric energy?
Well, it's through the will,
which we mentioned just
a moment ago as the driving
force behind the observer
effect.
And yes, will is a force.
Will moves our mind, which
directs our thoughts,
that then determine our
actions and what we manifest.
Mystery school teachings
say that etheric energy
is made of the essence of will.
Whose will?
Where does this will
energy come from?
Well there are actually
three layers to it.
At the highest vibrational level
is the will of divine source.
We could say it is
the will of God,
but by using the
word "God" here,
we mean the ultimate
source, which
in Kabbalah is called
ein sof, meaning
infinite and without end.
We could also call it
the will of spirit,
meaning our infinite
eternal self.
As the will of source
flows into the universe,
it then forms
another layer, which
we call the will of
nature and the universe.
This will keeps things flowing
in the order established
by the laws of nature.
And finally, the
third layer comes in
as the will energy flows into
our collective human will,
which we call the
will of humans.
This third layer of
the will of humans
is its own layer because the
spiritual teachings all tell us
that humans were given
the will to choose
between good and evil.
What does this mean?
We've all heard the
story in Genesis
where Adam and Eve ate
of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil
and then felt shame
and were subsequently
sent out of the Garden.
And usually when
we're told this story,
it comes with the dogma of
us having sinned and being
punished by God because
of it, leaving us
with a burden of guilt and
a sense of unworthiness.
Kabbalah tells the story
from a different perspective,
or actually several
different perspectives.
One cabalistic version
says that similar to how
there was an initial shattering
or symmetry breaking that
kicked off the Big
Bang, it was inevitable
that humanity would
go through its own
shattering or breaking with the
oneness of source or spirit.
Because only by going
through this process could
we then have choice.
And only by making choices,
and learning from the results
and consequences
of those choices,
do we grow in understanding,
and hopefully wisdom.
So rather than this physical
life being a punishment,
it is a gift that grants us the
opportunity to learn and grow
by our own efforts and choices.
And the whole notion
of sin in Kabbalah
is more about an accumulation
of friction or karma
that we create as
we miss the mark.
What's meant by
missing the mark?
Well, it comes back
to our use of will.
Similar to how the
shattering of the Big Bang
broke up the unified superforce
into separated force fields,
so too did the
shattering of humanity
not only make us feel separate
from each other and paradise,
it also caused
the will of humans
to break away from the
will of the divine.
What this means is that the
collective human will now
tends to flow contrary
to the divine will.
And we established
in other episodes
that the will of nature
and the will of spirit
prefer to move in a
clockwise flow, which
is a flow that builds towards
life and its progression.
If the will of humans
flows contrary to that,
then it tends to flow
counterclockwise.
There's plenty of evidence
in our human-made world
to see how our collective
trends flow more
against nature,
against divinity,
and even unconsciously
seem to prefer
counterclockwise
movements over clockwise.
Just start paying
attention to this
and you will see for yourself.
Now, if we imagine these three
layers of etheric energy,
two of them are
flowing clockwise,
while the third is
flowing counterclockwise.
What will that generate?
How about friction,
resistance, tension,
wasted energy, and stress?
And at a personal
level, when we are
trying to connect to the
light flowing in from source,
it's kind of like an Indiana
Jones obstacle course,
trying to get that light through
to reach us here at this level,
or that we have to go
through within our own mind
in order to rise above the
static of the collective mind
and into the
experience of oneness.
Another way we could say this
is that it blocks the light.
And as a result, we might
feel indecisive or pulled
in different directions.
Part of us wants this,
another part of us wants that.
What do we do?
Our task is to freely
choose by our own will
to align with the
higher wills, to align
with the flow of
nature, to align
with the flow of divinity.
And when we don't,
that is when we
miss the mark and
this resistance
accumulates in our energy field.
But when we do, that is when
we feel the most in the flow.
We feel alive, full of joy,
love, passion, and desire
to serve our fellow humans.
This brings us into
a coherent state.
And remember, if we want to
influence the quantum realm,
we must be in a coherent state.
So influencing etheric
energy or learning
to pluck the strings of
creation is really more
about aligning our
will with higher will
to come into that coherent
and congruent state of being.
When we do, things will flow
and manifest for us like magic.
This is a major key.
The question now is,
how do we do that?
How do we know what
that divine will even
is if it's so hard
for us to reach it
in our daily awareness?
How do we discern
between our ego's will,
the collective will,
and higher will?
First, we need to
know ourselves and get
good at tuning in to when
we feel that inner tension
or resistance.
Secondly, we can turn again to
the ancient mystery teachings
for guidance and support.
Let's start by defining what
good and evil really mean.
In Kabbalah, the
primordial will to good
sits at the top of
the tree of life.
In other words, this
is the divine will.
It is the will to create
goodness, the will
to progress towards
the full realization
of divine potential.
The vibration of this
will is pure agape love.
Not the kind of love we
humans typically think of,
but the limitless force of
creation that is the divine
love flowing from source.
That agape love is
the master frequency
we want to tune our
instruments into.
We want to let it
fill us completely.
This energy of love,
the divine will,
is always present,
just waiting for us
to open up and receive it.
How do we open up to receive?
We can start with meditation
and quieting our lower mind.
But more than that,
we must also have
enough faith that,
one, it's here,
and two, that we are
worthy of receiving it.
If we doubt too much, lack
faith, or feel unworthy,
that is our lower mind kicking
in again and blocking us
from receiving.
I find the best way to
trust and have faith
is to shift into the heart.
Unfortunately though, so many
people have shut their hearts
down due to past
traumas and that we
need to first heal in order to
feel safe in that open heart
space.
And for those people, just
know that there is always hope,
hope that things can get
better, that we can heal.
And that when we take steps in
the direction of our healing,
that is aligned
with the divine will
because it is an
act of self-love
to pursue our healing.
Then as we move further,
we must cultivate
faith, faith in ourselves
and our worthiness, faith
in the divine presence and
the goodness that is all
around us, faith in love.
Faith is what opens the door.
Then in time, after
enough direct experience
of receiving that love,
we move beyond faith
into knowing and
truly understanding.
There's a great passage in
the Gnostic Gospel of Philip
that says, "Faith is
receiving and love is giving.
Non can receive without faith,
and none can give without love.
When we believe, we are
then capable of receiving.
We give so that we
may experience love.
Whoever gives without
love experiences
nothing of importance."
This brings us to
a third key when
it comes to aligning with
the flow of divine will,
and that is to give
from divine love
without condition or attachment,
to give in pure service.
And by service
here, we don't mean
to give to others at
the expense of ourselves
because that is not
sustainable in the long run.
When we are truly in service,
we are following love and giving
from love and nothing else.
The only way to
truly do that and not
allow our ego to
pollute the love
is if we fill ourselves
wholly and completely
with that vibration
of agape love.
Meaning, we serve ourselves
first by filling our cup,
and then from our overflow, we
then give and serve to others.
The service to self comes from
having a spiritual practice,
as well as taking
care of ourselves,
actively pursuing our healing
and improvement of our skills
so that we can better serve
others in the long run.
And at the same
time, we don't want
to wait to be in service to
others before we're 100% healed
and in our own mastery.
It doesn't work that way.
As Philip said, we give so
that we may experience love.
By actively stepping
into service to others,
that love flows through us.
And from this, we continue to
grow and heal and become better
able to serve at higher levels.
This is what leads to
mastery and wisdom.
If we are players in
a cosmic symphony,
and if geometrically vibrating,
multi-dimensional strings
are the instruments,
which exists
at the vibrational level of the
ether or quantum vacuum that
is influenced by
coherent will, then how
do we become more
masterful at playing
these strings of creation?
By aligning with divine
will and filling ourselves
with the vibration
of agape love.
When we embody the
vibration of love,
we also emanate the
vibration of love.
On the flip side, when we
are full of doubt or judgment
or negative vibration, then
that is what we emanate.
Empaths tend to
be people who are
more sensitive to feeling these
vibrations that others emanate.
And while they
may sometimes feel
like it's a curse to the
person who is empathic,
it is actually a gift that
we can use when we also
become more masterful
at harnessing
the principle of vibration.
This relates to what is known
in science as entrainment.
Briefly, entrainment
is the phenomenon
of getting vibrating systems
to vibrate together in sync.
We humans have many
frequencies we can vibrate at.
Mastering the
principle of vibration
is about being able to set
our vibration to the desired
frequency at will, and then
intentionally emanate this
out to others to entrain
them to that frequency.
When we are coming from the
frequency of agape love,
that is when we are truly
aligned with the highest
divine will and in
service to those
we touch with this vibration.
Those we touch still have to
choose to let it in and receive
it, but we are holding that
possibility and invitation
without any attachment
or judgment for them
to lift up to their
own inner potential
to remember and embrace
that they are love,
that they are divine
eternal beings.
That is service.
And that is how we
become virtuosos
in our human ensemble of the
cosmic orchestra of life.
With this new
level of awareness,
our minds expand to
greater knowledge
of our multi-dimensionality
and the potential
that is within us.
As the Hermeticists
say, he who understands
this principle of vibration has
grasped the scepter of power.
The power is indeed
within our grasp.
Even though string
theory remains
to be confirmed by
experimental evidence,
it is a particularly
beautiful model.
As physicist Michio Kaku
writes, "The universe
is a symphony of strings,
and the mind of God,
which Einstein
eloquently wrote about,
is cosmic music resonating
through hyperspace."
Vibration determines
everything in string theory.
The challenge
physicists now face
is identifying
the exact geometry
of the extra dimensions.
They have many candidate shapes
that are allowed by the math,
over 10 to the power of
500 possibilities, which
is such a huge number
that we might as well
say it's infinite.
Each shape theoretically
corresponding
to its own universe
with different sets
of physical laws and tuning.
Rather than saying there can be
only one right answer resulting
in only one universe,
namely ours,
string theorists are
now going even further
by proposing that perhaps
all of these possibilities
exist somewhere
in the multiverse.
Join me again as we
expand into the multiverse
to explore what lies
beyond our universe.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]